---
tags: []
---

#### CONCEPT: An array can hold multiple values of the same data type simultaneously.

An array can store a group of values of the same type. Creating an array is similar to creating any other type of object in Java. 
You declare a reference variable and use the *new* keyword to create an instance of the array in memory. 
``` java
	int[] numbers;
```

This declares *numbers* as an array reference variable. The *numbers* variable can reference an array of int values. 
Declaring an array does not create an array. Below is.
``` java
	numbers = new int[6];
```

6 is the array's #arrays/sizeDeclarator. It indicates the number of elements, or values, the array can hold. 
When this is executed, *numbers* will reference an array that can hold six #arrays/elements, each one an int. 

As with other objects you can combine those statements into one. 
``` java
	int[] numbers = new int[6];
```

Arrays of any data type can be declared. These are all valid:
``` java
	float[] temperatures = new float[100];
	char[] letters = new char[41];
	long[] units =  new long[50];
	double[] sizes = new double[1200];
``` 

Note: an array's size decarator must be a non-negative integer expression. 
It can be a literal value, or a variable. It is common practice to use a final variable as a size declarator. This is so its contents cannot be changed during the program's execution.

``` java
	final int NUM_ELEMENTS  = 6;
	int[] numbers = new int [NUM_ELEMENTS];
``` 

**NOTE** : Once an array is created, its size cannot be changed.
#arrays/arrayDefaultFormat
#### Accessing Array Elements

Although an array has only one name, the elements in the array may be accessed and used as individual variables. Each element is assigned a number known as a #arrays/subscript. A subscript is used as an index to pinpoint a specific element within an array. The first element is assigned to the subscript 0, and so forth. The *numbers* array from above would have subscripts 0-5.

Each element in the *numbers* array, when accessed by its subscript, can be used an an int variable. 
``` java
	numbers[0] = 20;
	numbers[3] = 30;
```

The first statement stores 20 in the first element of the array while the second statement stores 30 in the 4th element. 

**NOTE** : The expression numbers[0] is pronounced "numbers sub zero." 
**NOTE** : By default, Java initializes array elements with 0. This means elements 1, 2, 4, and 5 are 0's.

#### Inputting and Outputting Array Contents

You can read values from the keyboard and store them in an array element just as you can a regular variable. You can also output the contents of an array element with *print* 
#arrays/ArrayDemo1
``` java
	import java.util.Scanner;
	public class ArrayDemo1 {
		public static void main(String[] args) {
		
			final int EMPLOYEES = 3;
			int[] hours = new int[EMPLOYEES];
			
			Scanner keyboard = new Scanner(System.in);
			System.out.println("Enter the hours worked by  " + EMPLOYEES + " employees.");
			System.out.print("Employee 1: ");
			hours[0] = keyboard.nextInt();
			
			System.out.print("Employee 2: ");
			hours[1] = keyboard.nextInt();
			
			System.out.print("Employee 3: ");
			hours[2] = keyboard.nextInt();
			
			System.out.println("The hours you entered are: ");
			System.out.println(hours[0]);
			System.out.println(hours[1]);
			System.out.println(hours[2]);
		}
	}
``` 

Subscript numbers can be stored in variables. This makes it possible to use a loop to "cycle through" an entire array, performing the same operation on each element. 
#arrays/ArrayDemo2 
``` java
	import java.util.Scanner;
	public class ArrayDemo2 {
		public static void main(String[] args) {
			final int EMPLOYEES = 3;
			int[] hours = new int [EMPLOYEES];
			
			Scanner keyboard = new Scanner(System.in);
			System.out.println("Enter the hours worked by " + EMPLOYEES + " employees.");
			
			for (int index = 0; index < EMPLOYEES; index++) {
				System.out.print("Employee " + (index + 1) + ":");
				hours[index] = keyboard.nextInt();
			}
			System.out.println("The hours you entered are:");
			for (int index = 0; index < EMPLOYEES; index++)
				System.out.println(hours[index]);
		}	
	}
```

Notice that the loop's control variable, *index*, is used as a subscript.

``` java
	hours[index] = keyboard.nextInt();
```

The variable *index* starts at 0. During the loop's first iteration, the user's input is stored in *hours[0]*. Then, *index* is incremented, so it's value becomes 1. This loop continues until values have been stored in all of the elements of an array.

#### Java Performs Bounds Checking

Java performs array #arrays/boundsChecking, which means that it does not allow a statement to use a subscript that is outside the range of valid subscripts for an array. 

``` java
	int[] values = new int[10];
```

Java will not allow a statement to use a subscript that is less that 0 or greater than 9 with this array. Bounds checking occurs at runtime. 
The Java compiler will not display an error message when it processes a statement that uses an invalid subscript. Instead, when the statement executes, the program throws an exception and immediately terminates. 

#### Watch Out for Off-by-One Errors
#arrays/off-by-one-errors
Array subscripts start at 0 rather than 1. If you use a loop to create an array of integers with 100 elements, be careful to use 0-99 not 1-100, this will cause the program to throw an exception.

#### Array Initialization
#arrays/arrayInitialization
Like regular variables, Java allows you to initialize an array's elements when you create the array.

``` java
	int[] days = {31, 22, 48, 85, 12, 50, 49};
```

This statement declares the reference variable *days*, creates an array in memory, and stores the initial values in the array. They are stored in elements in order as they appear in the list.

**NOTE** : You don't use the key word *new* when you use an #arrays/initializationList. Java automatically creates the array and stores the values in the initalization list in it. 

The Java compiler determines the size of the array by the number of items in the initalization list. 

``` java
	public class ArrayInitalization {
		public static void main(String[] args) {
			int[] days = { 31, 28, 31, 30, 31, 30, 31, 31, 30, 31, 30, 31 };
			
			for (int index = 0; index < 12; index++) {
				System.out.println("Month " + (index + 1) + " has " + days[index] + " days.");
			}
		}
	}
```

Java also allows you to spread the initialization list across multiple lines using commas (similar to variables)

#### Alternate Array Declaration Notation
#arrays/arrayDeclarationNotation
Java allows you to use two different styles when declaring an array.

``` java
	int[] numbers;
	int numbers[];
```

Both of these statements accomplish the same thing: They declare that *numbers* is a reference to an *int* array. The difference between the two styles is noticed when more than one variable is declared in the same statement. 

``` java
	int[] numbers, codes, scores;
```

This statement declares three variables, all of which are references to *int* arrays. 

``` java
	int numbers[], codes, scores;
```

This statement declares the same three variables, but only *numbers* is a reference to an *int* array. The *codes* and *scores* variables are regular *int* variables. 
This is because *int* is the data type for all the variables declared in the statement, and only *numbers* is followed by brackets. 
In order to declare all three variables as references to *int* arrays, you need brackets after each variable name. 

``` java
	int numbers[], codes[], scores[];
```

The first style is standard notation. 