#### CONCEPT: An array of *String* objects may be created, but if the array is uninitalized, each *String* in the array must be created individually.

This is a statement that creates an array of *String* objects initalized with values:

```java
String[] names = { "Bill", "Susan", "Steven", "Jean" };
```

Memory arranges array's of *Strings* differently from primitive data types. 

In order to use a *String* object, you must have a reference to the *String* object.
	This essentially means that an array of *String* objects is really just an array of references to *String* objects.

- "Bill" = element *names[0]*
- "Susan" = element *names[1]*
- ect...

```java
public class MonthDays {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		String[] months = { "January", "Febuary", "March", "April", "May", "June", "July", "August", "September", "October", "November", "December" };
		
		int[] days = { 31, 28, 31, 30, 31, 30, 31, 31, 30, 31, 30, 31 };
		
		for (int index = 0; index < months.length; index++) {
			System.out.println(months[index] + " has " + days[index] + " days.");
		}
	}
}
```

Like primitive data types, an initialization list automatically causes an array of String objects to be created in memory. 

**NOTE** : Without an initalization list, you must use the *new* keyword to create an array:

```java
final int SIZE = 4;
String[] names = new String[SIZE];
```

This statement creates an array of four references to *String* objects. 

The array is four uninitalized *String* references. Because they do not reference any objects, they are set to *null*.

When creating an uninitalized array of *String* objects, you need to assign values to each element in the array that you are going to use. 

``` java
final int SIZE = 4;
String[] names = new String[SIZE];
names[0] = "Bill";
names[1] = "Susan";
names[2] = "Steven";
names[3] = "Jean";
```

Now the array *names* will reference these strings.

#### Calling *String* Methods from an Array Element

[[Chapter2]] Explained that *String* objects have several methods. You can also call these methods on elements because each element of a *String* array is a *String* object. Here's a *toUpperCase* example:

``` java
System.out.println(names[0].toUpperCase());
```

*charAt* example

``` java
char letter;
letter = names[3].charAt(0);
```

**NOTE** : Arrays have a field named *length*. *String* objects have a method named *length*. When working with *String* arrays, do not confuse the two. The following loop displays the length of each string held in names. Note that the loop uses both the array's *length* field and each element's *length* method.

``` java
for (int i = 0; i < names.length; i++)
	System.out.println(names[i].length());
```

Because the array's *length* member is a field, you do not write a set of parentheses after its name of the *String* class's *length* method.
