#### CONCEPT: A sorting algorithm is used to arrange data into some order. A search algorithm is a method of locating a specific item in a larger collection of data. The selection sort and binary search are popular sortingand searching algorithms.

#### The Selection Sort Algorithm

Data is often sorted in array's. It could be for:
- Customer lists - in alphabetical order
- Student grades - highest to lowest
- Product codes - by color

A sorting algorithm is a technique for scanning through an array and rearranging its contents in some specific order. 

**The Selection Sort** 
- The smallest value in the array is located and moved to element 0.
- The next smallest value is moved to element 1, and so on...

The selection sort scans the array, starting at element 0, and locates the element with the smallest value. The contents of this element are then swapped with the contents of element 0.

After switching, the algorithm begins on the next element. 0 -> 1

The following method performs a selection sort on an integer array. The array that is passed as an argument is sorted in acending order.

``` java
pulbic static void selectionSort(int[] array) {
	int startScan, index, minIndex, minValue;
	for (startScan = 0; startScan < (array.length-1); startScan++) {
		minIndex = startScan;
		minValue = array[startScan];
		for (index = startScan + 1; index < array.length; index++) {
			if (array[index] < minValue) {
				minValue = array[index];
				minIndex = index;
			}
		}
	array[minIndex] = array[startScan];
	array[startScan] = minValue;
	}
}
```

#### The Binary Search Algorithm

Previously, we used the sequential search algorithm for searching an array. 
- The advantage of sequential search is its simplicity.
	-  this also means the data doesn't need to be stored in any particular way
- The disadvantage is its inefficiency.
	- if an array contains 20,000 elements, the algorithm will have to look at every element in order to find a value stored in the last element.
- Typically, for an array of *n* items, the sequential search will locate an item in *N/2* attempts.

This just means sequential sorts shouldn't be used on large arrays if speed is important.

Binary search is much more efficient.
- But, the values in the array must be sorted in acending order.

Instead of testing the array's first element, the algorithm startes with the element in the middle.
- If the desired value is found, the search is over. 
- Otherwise, the value in the middle element is either greater than or less than the value being searched for. 
	- this effectively halves the elements to search for

This process of taking the middle element repeats itself until the value is found or there are no more elements to test. 

The algorithm uses three variables:
- *first*
- *last*
- *middle* 
The *first* and *last* variables mark the boundaries of the portion of the array that is being searched.
- They are initialized with the subscripts of the array's *first* and *last* elements. 
- The subscript of the element halfway between the *first* and *last* is calculated and stored in the *middle* variable.

If the element in themiddle of the array does not contain the search value, the *first* or *last* variables are adjusted so that only the top or bottom half of the array is searched during the next iteration. 

The method below performs a binary search on an integer array. 
- The first parameter, *array*, is searches for an occurrence of the number stored in *value*.
- If the number is found, its array subscript is returned.
- Otherwise, -1 is returned, indicating that the value did not appear in the array.

``` java
public static int binarySearch(int[] array, int value) {
	int first;
	int last;
	int middle;
	int position;
	boolean found;
	
	first = 0;
	last = array.length - 1;
	position = -1;
	found = false;
	
	while (!found && first <= last) {
		middle = (first + last) / 2;
		
		if (array[middle] == value) {
			found = true;
			position = middle;
		}
		else if (array[middle] > value) {
			last = middle - 1;
		}
		else {
			first = middle + 1;
		}
	}
	return position;
}
```

**BinarySearchDemo HERE**

#### To Next: [[7.12 Command-Line Arguments and Variable-Length Argument Lists]]