## Argument Lists

**CONCEPT: When you invoke a Java program from the OS command line, you can specify arguments that are passed into the *main* method of the program. In addition, you can write a method that takes a variable number of arguments. When the method runs, it can determine the number of arguments that were passed to it and act accordingly.

#### Command-Line Arguments

Every program written so far the *main* header has been written like:

``` java
public static void main(String[] args)
```

Inside the parentheses of the method header is the declaration of a marameter named *args*. this parameter is an array name. As its declaration indicates, it is used to reference an array of *Strings* the array that is passed into the *args* paramenter comes from the OS command line. 

``` java
public class CommandLine {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		for (int index = 0; index < args.length; index++)
			System.out.println(args[index]);
	}
}
```

If the program is compiled and executed with the following code:

``` java
java CommandLine How does this work?
```

The output would be:

``` java
How
does
this
work?
```

Any items typed on the command line, separated by spaces, and after the name of the class are considered to be one or more arguments that are to be passed into the *main* method. 

**NOTE** : It is not required that the name of the *main*'s parameter array be *args*. You can name it anything you wish. Although, it is standard convention to use *args*.

#### Variable-Length Argument Lists

Java provides a mechanism known as *variable-length argument lists*, which makes it possible to write a method that takes a variable number of arguments. When the method runs, it can determine the number of arguments that were passed into it and act accordingly.

For example, suppose we need to write a method named *sum* that can accept any number of *int* values and return the sum of those values:

``` java
result = sum(10, 20);
```

Here we pass two arguments to the method. After this code executes 30 would be stored in the *result* variable. But, the method does not have to accept two arguments each time it is called:

``` java
int firstVal = 1, secondVal = 2, thirdVal = 3, fourthVal = 4;
result = sum(firstVal, secondVal, thirdVal, fourthVal);
```

Executing this code would store 10 in the *result* variable. 

The *sum* method:

``` java
public static int sum(int... numbers) {
	int total = 0;
	
	for (int val : numbers)
		total += val;
	
	return total;
}
```

The declaration of the *numbers* parameter is declared in the method header. The ellipsis (three periods) that follows the data type indicates that *numbers* is a special type of parameter known as a *vararg parameter*. A vararg parameter can take a variable number of arguments.

vararg parameters are actually arrays. In the *sum* method, the *numbers* parameter is an array of *ints*. 
- All of the arguments that are passed to the *sum* method are stored in the elements of the *numbers* array. 
- The method uses the enhanced *for* loop to step through the elements.

You can also write a method to accept a variable number of object references as arguments.
- Below shows a method that accepts a variable number of references to *BankAccount* objects. The method returns the total of the objects' *balance* fields.

``` java
public class VarargsDemo2 {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		double total;
		
		BankAccount account1 = new BankAccount(100.0);
		BankAccount account2 = new BankAccount(500.0);
		BankAccount account3 = new BankAccount(1500.0);
		
		total = totalBalance(account1);
		System.out.println("Total: $" + total);
		
		total = totalBalance(account1, account2);
		System.out.println("Total: $" + total);
		
		total = totalBalance(account1, account2, account3);
		System.out.println("Total: $" + total);
	}
	public static double totalBalance(BankAccount... accounts) {
		double total = 0.0;
		
		for (BankAccount acctObject : accounts) {
			total += acctObject.getBalance();
		}
		return total;
	}
}
```

You can write a method to accept a mixture of fixed arguments and a variable-length argument list. 
- For example, suppose we want to write a method named *courseAverage*, which accepts the name of a course as a *String*, and a variable-length list of test scores as *doubles*. 
- We could write the method header like this:

``` java
public static void courseAverage(String course, double... scores)
```

This method has a regular *String* parameter named *course*, and a vararg parameter named *scores*. When we calle this method, we always pass a *String* argument, then a list of *double* values. 
- Example in - [[VarargsDemo3.java]]