---
tags: []
---

#### CONCEPT: Individual array elements are processed like any other type of variable.
#arrays/processingArrays

Processing array elements is no different from processing other variables. The following statement multiplies *hours[3]* by the variable *payRate*:
``` java
	grossPay = hours[3] * payRate;
```

#arrays/arrayIncrements

``` java
	int[] score = {7, 8, 9, 10, 11};
	++score[2];   //pre-increment
	score[4]++;   //post-increment
```

When using increment and decrement operators, be careful not to use the operator on the subscript when you intend to use it on the array element.

For example, the following statement decrements the variable *count*, but does nothing to the value stored in the array element *amount[count]*:
``` java
	amount[count--];
```

#arrays/PayArray 

``` java
	import java.util.Scanner;
	
	public class PayArray {
		public static void main(String[] args) {
			
			final int EMPLOYEES = 5;
			double payRate;
			double grossPay;
			
			int[] hours = new int[EMPLOYEES];
			
			Scanner keyboard = new Scanner(System.in);
			
			System.out.println("Enter the hours worked by " + EMPLOYEES + " employees who all earn the same hourly rate.");
			
			for (int index = 0; index < EMPLOYEES; index++) {
				System.out.print( "Employee #" + (index + 1) + ": ");
				
				hours[index] = keyboard.nextInt();
			}
			System.out.print("Enter the hourly rate for each employee: ");
				payRate = keyboard.nextDouble();
				
			System.out.println( "Here is each employee's gross pay:");
			
			for (int index = 0; index < EMPLOYEES; index++) {
				grossPay = hours[index] * payRate;
				System.out.println("Employee#" + (index + 1) + ": $" + grossPay);
			}
		}
	}
```

The following statement assigns the value of *hours[index]* times *payRate* to the *grossPay* variable:
``` java
	grosspay = hours[index] * payRate;
```

Array  elements may also be used in relational expressions. For example, the following *if* statement determines whether *cost[20]* is less than *cost[10]*:
``` java
	if (cost[20] < cost[0])
```

And the following *while* loop iterates as long as the *value[count]* does not equal 0:
``` java
	while (value[count]) != 0) {
		*statements*
	}
```
#### Array Length
#arrays/arrayLength
Each array in Java has a public field named *length*. This field contains the number of elements in the array. For example:
``` java
	double[] temperatures = new double[25];
```

Because the *temperatures* array has 25 elements, the following statement would assign 25 to the variable *size*:
``` java
	size = temperatures.length;
```

The *length* field can be useful when processing the entire contents of an array. For example, the following loop steps through an array and displays the contents of each element. The array's *length* field is used in the test expression as the upper limit for the loop control variable:
``` java
	for (int i = 0; i < temperatures.length; i++) {
		System.out.println(temperatures[i]);
	}
```

**Warning**: Careful not to cause an #arrays/off-by-one-errors when using the *length* field as the upper limit of a subscript. The *length* field contains the number of elements in an array. The larges subscript in an array is *length* - 1.

**NOTE**: You cannot change the value of an array's *length* field. 

#### The Enhanced *for* Loop
#arrays/arrayForLoop

Java provides a specialized version of the *for* loop that, in many circumstances, simplifies #arrays/arrayProcessing. It is known as the #arrays/enhancedForLoop.  General format:
``` java 
	for (dataType elementVariable : array)
		statement;
``` 

The *enhanced for loop* is designed to iterate once for every element in an array. Each time the loop iterates, it copies an array element to a variable. 

- *dataType elementVariable* is a variable declaration. This variable will recieve the value of a different array element during each loop iteration. During the firest loop iteration, it receives the value of the first element; during the second iteration, it recieves the value of the second element, and so on. This variable must be of the same data type as the array elements, or a type that the elements can automatically be converted to. 
- *array* is the name of an array on which you wish the loop to operate. The loop will iterate once for every element in the array.
- *statement* is a statement that executes during a loop iteration.

For example, assume the following array declaration:
``` java
	int[] numbers = { 3, 6, 9 };
```

We can use the *enhanced for loop* to display the contents of the *numbers* array:
``` java
	
	for (int val : numbers)
		System.out.println(val);
```

Because the *numbers* array has three elements, this loop will iterate three times. The first time it iterates, the *val* variable will receive the value in *numbers[0]*. During the second iteration , *val* will recieve the value in *numbers[1]*.  And so forth. 

The output will be:
``` java
	3
	6
	9
``` 

If you need to execute more than one statement in the *enhanced for loop*, enclose the block of statement sin a set of braces. 

##### The enhanced *for* Loop versus the Traditional *for* Loop
When you need to access the values that are stored in an array, from the first element to the last element, the *enhanced for loop* is simpler to use than the *traditional for loop*. With the *enhanced for loop* you do not have to be concerned abou the size of the array, and you do not have to create an "index" variable to hold subscripts.

However, there are circumstances in which the *enhanced for loop* is not adequate. You cannot use the *enhanced for loop* as follows:

- if you need to change the contents of an array element
- if you need to work through the array elements in reverse order
- if you need to access some of the array elements, but not all of them
- if you need to simultaneously work with two or more arrays within the loop
- if you need to refer to the subscript number of a particular element

Any of these circumstances above, the *traditional for loop* is the better option.

#### Letting the User Specify an Array's Size
#arrays/userInputArraySize
Java allow syou to use an integer variable to specify an array's size decarator. This makes it possible for the user to set an array's size.

#arrays/DisplayTestScores 
``` java
	import java.util.Scanner;
	
	public class DisplayTestScores {
		public static void main(String[] args) {
		
			int numTests;
			int[] tests;
			
			Scanner keyboard = new Scanner(System.in)
			
			System.out.print("How many tests do you have? ");
				numTests = keyboard.nextInt();
			
			tests = new int[numTests];
			
			for (int index = 0; index < tests.length; index++) {
				System.out.print("Enter test score " + (index + 1) + " : ");
					tests[index] = keyboard.nextInt();
			}
			System.out.println();
			System.out.println("Here are the scores you entered:");
			
			for (int index = 0; index < tests.length; index++)
				System.out.print(tests[index] + " ");
		}
	}
```

This program allows the user to set the size of the array. The following statement creates the array, using the *numTests* variable to determine its size:
``` java
	tests = new int[numTests];
``` 

The program then uses two *for* loops. The first allows the user to input each test score. The second displays all of the test scores. Both loops use the *length* member to control their number of iterations:
``` java
	for (int index = 0; index < tests.length; index++)
```
#### Reassigning Array Reference Variables
#arrays/reassigningArrayReferenceVariables
It is possible to reassign an array reference variable to a different array:
``` java
	int[] numbers = new int[10];
	numbers = new int[5];
```

The first statement creates a ten-element integer array and assigns its address to the *numbers* variable.

The second statement allocates a five-element integer array and assigns its address to the *numbers* variable. The address of the five-element array takes the place of the address of the ten-element array. After this statement executes, the *numbers* variable references the five-element array instead of the ten-element array. Because the ten-element array is no longer referenced, it cannot be accessed.

#### Copying Arrays
#arrays/copyingArrays
Because an array is an object, there is a distinction between an array and the variable that references it. The array and the reference variable are two separate entities. 

**WRONG METHOD**
``` java
	int[] array1 = { 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 };
	int[] array2 = array1;       //this does not copy array1
```

The first statement creates an array and assigns its address to the *array1* variable. The second statement assigns *array1* to *array2*. This does not make a copy of the array referenced by *array1*. Rather, it makes a copy of the address that is stored in *array1* and stores it in *array2*. After this statement executes, both *array1* and *array2* variables will reference the same array. 

This is called a *reference copy*, only the address is copied, not the contents of the array object.

Instead, to copy an array you need to copy the individual elements of one array to another. Usually, this is best done with a loop:
``` java
	int[] firstArray = { 5, 10, 15, 20, 25 };
	int[] secondArray = new int[5];
	for (int index = 0; index < firstArray.length; index++)
		secondArray[index] = firstArray[index];
```

This copies each element of *firstArray* to the corresponding element of *secondArray*.
## **To next:** [[7.3 Passing Arrays as Arguments to Methods]]